---
title: "Ubik"
date:  2025-10-10
categories: [literature]
tags: [Phillip K Dick, Science Fiction]
---

First Mariner Books edition 2012. First published 1969.

## Introduction

This is a highly acclaimed book, so I have been excited to read this book for quite some time and am glad to have finally gotten around to it. The only other Phillip K Dick novel I had read before this is his similarly acclaimed *Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep*. Whereas the aforementioned work was set in a dark, gritty world with a plot which centered around the place of androids in society and the degradation of the environment and society, this novel takes place in a much more brightly colored world and centers around individuals with psionic powers yet also has elements displaying the degradation of society. Here I will dive into my thoughts on the novel. There will be spoilers, but the focus of this post will be less about the plot of the story and more about the surroundings of the plot and the world in which it is set in.

## The World of Ubik

The plot of this novel, and likely its world as well, is centered around corporations. Individuals with psionic powers work for a corporation headed by a man named Ray Hollis, the "villain" of the story, if one can actually say that this novel has a villain, a question which we will visit at the end of this post. These psionics, which we will describe in more detail later, are generally hired out to commit acts of corporate espionage, as their skills are particularly suited for the stealing of corporate secrets and the sabotaging of production. The psionics are counterbalanced by the inertials, who are individuals with powers which cancel out the abilities of psionics in their vicinity. This creates a cat-and-mouse game of intrigue and spy craft which can on occasion become violent.

### The Technology

Within this world we see a slightly different array of technology than we are accustomed to seeing in science fiction novels. The novel was set in the 1990s and written in the late 1960s. Aside from the psionics, which it is somewhat up in the air whether they are to be considered a technological advancement, and a few other major advancements, technology somewhat stagnated. This is something that was hinted at in the later portions of the novel. It appears that mundane technologies, like toasters, coffee dispensers, refrigerators, and even doorways, remained stagnant except for two "improvements": the addition of a coin slot and a lightweight "artificial intelligence" which interfaces with and enforces tolls on users. These micro-transactions are a constant point of contention in the novel and the author hints at how they are fundamental in debt trapping individuals and halting upward mobility in society.

Aside from the coins slots, we see a couple of major innovations. Firstly, the rich had access to private flying transportation capable of taking off from a rooftop and quickly ushering their passengers across continents. Secondly, humans had begun colonizing the moon and mars and were reaping commercial benefits from doing so. Color TV and video phones were widespread and news or important memos could be delivered by devices know as homeopapes which printed out content on scrolling papers. There is also mention that a interstellar drive was nearing completion, but the source of this information is highly untrustworthy.

Notable is the absence of advanced computers. It appears that in this world the transistor had not yet been invented, or at the very least had not been minified to the degree that we saw in the 1990s of our own reality. Another notable absence is the internet, but Dick was not the only mid-century science fiction author to miss the mark on predicting that invention.

### Half-life

By far, the weirdest scientific achievement in this world is the half-life. When a loved one passes on, wealthy family members can pay to have them stored in "Cold Pak", some sort of cryogenic freezing, where they can still be conversed with for sometime before mysteriously fading away, hence the term "half-life". The explanation behind this is a mysterious physical particle know as protophasons. The half-life is a key device in the novel as it can be used to preserve the voice of important decision makers within an organization for sometime after their physical death. Large portions of the novel also take place in half-life, as the protagonists of the novel were killed by a dirty bomb and frozen cryogenically. A key element of the story is them trying to explain odd circumstances occurring around them, and them being within the half-life is a discovery which explains many, but not all, of these mysterious occurrences.

We later find out that the half-life had created an entirely new world of competition for survival. Within the world of the half-life we find individuals like Jory who have the power to devour the fleeting essences of those stored in Cold Pak near them in order to prolong their lives. They have gained the ability to create simulated worlds around the consciousnesses of their victims in order to snare them and drain away their life force. Their actions are countermanded by talented individuals like Ella who have gained the ability to counteract their powers, a process which we will touch upon later.

Lastly, we see a slight tinge of mysticism in the world of the half-life, a rare occurrence in the realm of science fiction. Ella comments, and later succumbs to, a "cave with fiery red lighting", something which she and Glen believe to be a womb which she will eventually be reborn into as described in the *Tibetan Book of the Dead*.

### The Clothing

Another standout feature of the world of Ubik worthy of comment is the fashion. The clothing is a varied in style as it is in color, and by that I mean it is completely bonkers. I find it very interesting that a large proportion of time spent describing scenes and the surrounding world in the novel is spent on people's clothing. Here I will include a collection of various descriptions of people outfits encountered throughout the book.

> ...a worried looking clerical individual with nearly opaque glasses and wearing a tabby-fur blazer and pointed yellow shoes waited at the reception counter... (pg 3)

> He wore a varicolored Dacron wash-and-wear suit, knit cummerbund and dip-dyed cheesecloth cravat. (pg 5)

> ...wearing his usual mohair poncho, apricot colored felt hat, argyle ski socks and carpet slippers... (pg 25)

> ...he still has on his electric-yellow cummerbund, petal skirt, knee-hugging hose and military-style visored cap. He seated himself wearily on the living-room couch, starts to take off one of his gauntlets... (pg 38)

> A young stringbean of a girl with glasses and straight lemon-yellow hair, wearing a cowboy had, black lace mantilla and Bermuda shorts... who wore a silk sari and nylon obi with bobby socks... this one, in a floral mumu and Spandex bloomers... (pg 54)

## The Psionics

What are psionics? The two main types of psionics mentioned in the novel are precogs, who have the power of *precognition* and act as seers of sorts, and telepaths, who can read the thoughts of others. There also appear to be those with the power of telekinesis and one particularly powerful girl who can supposedly alter reality by contemplating a situation in the past that she wants to have changed. The source of a psionic's power derives from their natural ability to produce a certain type of wave which, through harmonic resonance, can amplify the powers of other nearby psionics. The inertials seem to generate counter-waves which, through destructive resonance, cancel out the powers of psionics.

### Were they always there or did they suddenly appear?

The talents appear to have developed naturally but the exact reason why is unknown. While in the half-life, Joe Chip, one of the main characters of the story, has an impatient discussion with a taxi driver in the 1930s, the reason that this was possible will be discussed later. During the conversation, he explains that his career revolves around psionics, a talent which is unknown to humanity at the time of the 1930. In other places in the novel, we see hints that some inertials and psionics develop their powers to counteract the waves produced by the similarly talented parents who raised them. This suggests that psionics powers developed by some sort of hyper-charged evolutionary process.

## What is Ubik?

Lastly, let us contemplate one of the first questions presented to us in the novel and one of the last to be answered: what is Ubik? Not only is the mysterious substance the title of the novel, but it is the subject of the splash text at the beginning of most chapters and is also a critical object in the story. It is first introduced in the opening sentences of the novel.

> Friends, this is clean-up time and we're discounting all our silent, electric Ubiks by this much money. Yes, we're throwing away the blue-book. And remember: every Ubik on our lot has been used only as directed. (pg 1)

This introduces a couple of tropes which are used throughout the novel when referring to Ubik. First of all, it is nearly always referred to in the context of some sort of advertisement or promotional. Secondly, the use that it is presented as having is varied in every situation. Thirdly, it is *totally* safe, as long as used as directed. Here is another example.

> The best way to ask for beer is to sing out Ubik. Made from select hops, choice water, slow-aged for perfect flavor, Ubik is the nation's number-one choice in beer. Made only in Cleveland. (pg 10)

In the first example, Ubik is presented as some sort of used electric vehicle while in the second it is beer. We are presented with another example at the beginning of chapter 3.

> Instant Ubik has all the fresh flavor of just-brewed drip coffee. Your husband will say, Christ, Sally, I used to think your coffee was only so-so. But now, wow! Safe when taken as directed. (pg 19)

It is even presented as medicine.

> Can't make the frug contest, Helen; stomach's upset. I'll fix you Ubik! Ubik drops you back in the thick of things fast. Taken as directed, Ubik speeds relief to head and stomach. Remember: Ubik is only seconds away. Avoid prolonged use. (pg 47)

Eventually, Ubik is introduced into the story itself, once again through a televised advertisement.

> Tired of lazy tastebuds? ... Has boiled cabbage taken over your world of food? That same old, stale, flat, Monday-morning odor no matter how many dimes you put into your stove? Ubik changes all that; Ubik wakes up food flavor, puts hearty taste back where it belongs, and restores fine food smell." On the screen a brightly colored spray can replaced Glen Runciter. "One invisible puff-puff whisk of economically priced Ubik banishes compulsive obsessive fears that the entire world is turning into clotted milk, worn-out tape recorders and obsolete iron-cage elevators, plus other, further, as-yet-unglimpsed manifestations of decay." (pg 133)

The seemingly nonsensical later portion of the advertisement makes more sense in context with the plot of the novel and this will be discussed later in the post. However, we discover that Ubik is a substance stored dispersed via spray cans and has the ability to reverse the decaying powers of creatures like Jory who feed on consciousnesses trapped in half-life.

Because of the importance of Ubik for the survival of our protagonists, they themselves begin to solve the mystery of Ubik. At one point, a key connection is drawn between the name and the Latin word *ubique*, which means *anywhere*, or *omnipresent* and is the root of the word *ubiquitous*. This explains how the variety of substances in the advertisements at the beginning of each chapter are all Ubik.

### Forms

In order to finally understand what Ubik is, we must make a bit of a tangent into ancient philosophy. Plato and the ancient Greeks are famous for, among other things, the theory of forms, which is a concept that all objects organize themselves to fit the form and function of immutable abstract concepts which govern the characteristics and uses of their physical manifestations. In the half-life, Jory drains the life essences of individuals by creating a simulation of reality out of forms. This is an arduous process that can break down when Jory tires, and when he does so the elements of the simulation revert in their forms, resulting in a decay of the timeline where reality regresses from the 1990s all the way to the 1930s. Various objects, such as refrigerators, methods of transportation, clothing, currency, and even Ubik itself, revert to previous renditions of their forms. This eventually affects Jory's prey as well, causing their body to decay into dust and thus allowing him to consume their essence.

This is where Ubik comes into play. By spraying the mysterious substance on themselves, one can reverse the regression of their form. Ubik is the tool that the anti-Jory's use to stand up to the Jory's in the half-life.

### The Final Explanation

It is not clear whether or not Ubik actually exists or is simply a product manufactured by the anti-Jory's. I am inclined to believe in the latter, as Ubik is delivered to our protagonists when they concentrate and "form" the delivery of the spray cans to them by the hands of a representative of the corporation which creates the mysterious substance. It makes sense that if someone was desperate to discover the key to reversing the decay around them in the half life and figured out that matter could be manipulated by concentrating on manifesting forms, then they would simply manifest a magic cure-all spray can.

In the closing of the novel, the intrepid Joe Chip does just this, and because of it we are provided with an official explanation of what Ubik is by a representative of the company which produces it.

> "A spray can of Ubik," the girl answered, "is a portable negative ionizer, with a self-contained, high-voltage, low-amp unit powered by a peak-gain helium battery of 25kv. The negative ions are given a counter-clockwise spin by a radically biased accelerate chamber, which creates a centripetal tendency to them so that they cohere rather than dissipate. A negative ion field diminishes the velocity of anti-protophasons normally present in the atmosphere; as soon as their velocity falls they cease to be anti-protophasons and, under the principle of parity, no longer can unite with protophasons radiated from presons frozen in cold-pac; that is, those in half-life. The end result is that the protophasons not canceled by anti-protophasons increase, which means -- for a specific time, anyhow -- an increment in the net put-forth field of protophasonic activity... which the affected half-lifer experiences as greater vitality plus a lowering of the experience of low cold-pac temperatures. So you can see why regressed forms of Ubik failed to--" (pg. 224)

And there you have it. Recall that protophasons were revealed to be the mysterious physical building blocks that enable the preservation and communication with a cryogenically frozen cadaver, and anti-protophasons are the anti-particles which cancel them out. So in essence, Ubik is a magic substance which cancels out anti-protophasons and allows for the rebuilding of one's supply of protophasons, but I am still inclined to believe that Ubik is simply a magical panacea manifested by the anti-Jory's to prolong their existence in the half-life.

## Parting Thoughts

### Is there a villain in this story?

Throughout the novel, Ray Hollis was certainly vilified, as were the individuals under his employ. But we must remember that the entirety of this novel was written from the point of view of the inertials under the employ of Glen Runciter's prudence organization, so we are relayed information about Hollis from biased sources. What if Hollis is actually somewhat of a guardian angel for the marginalized psionics and he is leveraging their powers to give them respected professions in the world. One clue for this is the anti-psionic TV advertisements for Runciter Associates which feel super jingoist, almost like they are attempting to coerce the public into having a negative view of psionics. Even the general term for the corporations employing the inertials, prudence organizations, feels negative. Here is a sample of the descriptions of some of the ads aired by the prudence establishments, wherein you can detect clear elements of fear mongering.

    > Ads over TV and the homeopapes by the various ant-psi prudence establishments had shrilly squawked their harangues of late. Defend your privacy, the ads yammered on the hour, from all media. Is a stranger turning in on you? Are you *really* alone? That for the telepaths... and then the queasy worry about precogs. Are your actions being predicted by someone you never met? Someone you would not want to meet or invite into your home? Terminate anxiety; contacting your nearest prudence organization will first tell you if in fact you are the victim of unauthorized intrusions, and then, on your instructions, nullify these intrusions -- at a moderate cost to you. (pg 7)

Another point which brought up in the story from the point of view of a neutral observer is how does one know if they are actually being intruded upon by a psionic? There is no independent source of verification, so to the user it is possible that the prudence organizations could fabricate false evidence of a psionic in order to grift some quick money.

But what about in the half-life? The Jory's appear to be villains as well. But even here, it is difficult to cast them as villains because, at the end of the day, they are simply creatures who have adapted to their environments in order to survive.

### Connections to Modern Tech

One may be inclined to dismiss any notion of clairvoyance in this novel by pointing out the absurdity of the technology, fashion tastes, and development of humans with psychic abilities. However, this may be a mistake. Although there are clearly no psionics running around society reading our thoughts and looking through metaphorical crystal balls to predict our movements, different types of technology have emerged which allow corporations to accomplish similar feats. Smart devices and data harvesting are slowly opening doors to mass surveillance. Mining and analysis of this new wealth of data reveals consumer trends and preferences which allow for hyper-targeted advertisements. Have you started craving a burger, discussed it with a friend, and then received a banner ad on your phone for a cheeseburger from your local fast food chain a few minutes later?
