---
title: "The Brothers Karamazov - Book I"
date:  2026-05-18
categories: [literature]
tags: [Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Borthers Karamazov]
---

# The Brothers Karamazov

Penguin Classics, 2024

## Series Introduction

The Brothers Karamazov has always been a book that I knew I needed to read but never got around to. I ended up starting it in college, but put it down due to a busy schedule. Now, realizing an interest in profound novels, I have decided to return to it. This series of posts will cover my reactions and thoughts about the novel.

## Book I - The Story of a Certain Little Family

As the title implies, the first book is about introducing the family and setting the stage of the story. The narration of the story follows from Fyodor Dostoyevsky himself relaying curious events about events which transpired in his local town. The narrator suggests that the story is set in a smaller, but not quite backwater, town in Russia. Based on what we can glean from the first book, the town has several large manors nearby, is in a region of Russia with many aristocratic estates, has a large and beautifully crafted monastery outside of town, and has several drinking establishments. I think but cannot confirm that the town is set somewhere between Moscow and the Ukraine.

### The Family

Four men, a father and three sons, are the focus of this story. The book begins by introducing them from eldest to youngest.

The father, named Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov, is not a good person. He groomed an heiress, swindled his way into a small fortune, found some people to manage it for him, and then partied his life away. Along the way, he tortured his first wife until she fled into a life of poverty and an early peasant's grave, forgot that he had a son, swindled another young heiress, had two children with her, drove her to insanity and her early grave, and gleefully gave away all three sons in the process. After this his life seems to have concerned itself with partying and practicing the time honored trade of dodging child support payments. He is not a good person.

At the time of the story, the father is described as a corpulus man. We do see comments on how his character experienced incremental changes sometimes when one of his sons came back into his life, so the author is possibly preparing us for some sort of character shift on the father's part.

I find it curious that the father shares the name of the author.

### The Eldest Son

The eldest son, Dmitry (Mitya) Fyodorovich, was famously forgotten by his dad. An "enlightened" local landed elite by the name of Miusov took an interest in the boy and offered to raise him. However, the noble soon lost interest and the son was passed from family to family. Although his life had serious ups and downs, he appeared to be a somewhat successful military officer and ended up making, and spending, large amounts of money. He always knew that his father was wealthy with an estate, but he seriously overestimated the value, something that his father used to swindle him into debt. Upon learning that his father had trapped him into debt,

> ... it turned out, to his very great bewilderment, ... that he had already received from Fyodor Pavlovich in cash the entire value of his property and might even owe him money... The young man was horror-struck, suspected lying and deceit, became nearly beside himself and almost lost his reason. This was the event that led to the catastrophe, the description of which constitutes the subject of my first, introductory novel or rather its outer aspect. (pg. 22)

First of all, I would like to take this time to comment on how cool Dostoyevsky's narration is. He is literally telling the story to us, making it clear that these are his words. They also make the account feel much more realistic. The plot line in this introduction is also cool, as we quickly placed at the scene of the opening of the novel, only to be thrown on another introductory tangent. This pattern of proceeding from the origin of one character to the beginning of the novel, only be to brought back to the origin of another character, is repeated through all of the sons. Everytime we are brought into the "present" we learn a little more of the situation. It is a very neat, and commonly used, plot line in many books and TV shows.

Character-wise, Mitya appears to be somewhat entitled, free-willed, and emotional.

### The Middle Son

Ivan showed academic promise from a young age. He was sent to be raised by a "tutor of geniuses" and then pursued a degree in the natural sciences. He was aware of the poor character of his father, and Ivan understood that he would likely never pry any of his share of the wealth from his father. Showing promise as a news reporter, he ground his way through university and ended up being a literary critic of some renown. As an aside, in the introduction, Dostoyevksy implies that he is not the biggest of fans of Russian literary critics. He implies that they are not the biggest fan of him either.

Oddly enough, he appeared to get along quite well with his father when he one day appeared in the village. He even went as far as to move in with his father, a curious move for someone who appears to be so polar opposite to their parent. It is then revealed that this may hint at conspiracy, as Ivan later reveals that he arrived partly at the behest of the elder brother, for reasons in which we are kept in suspense. This, too, is curious because Ivan and Mitya are described to be most opposite in character yet both seem to have a high degree of respect and camaraderie towards each other. Ivan is also described as the mediator between the father and the eldest son, as legal action has begun to take place over the discovery of the father's swindling of the son. And so another character is introduced, and another facet of the beginning of the novel is revealed.

### The Youngest Son

It is immediately apparent that Aleksey (Aloysha) is considered the hero of the story. In the author's note preceding the novel, Dostoyevsky even describes him as "...my hero, I am nevertheless aware that he is in no way a man of greatness, ..." Aleksey is described as a beloved saint. A lover of all and beloved by all, he is referred to as "Christ-like". He is described as enduring and unwilling to judge as well as a lover of all, but not naive. Although he was not the top student in all of his courses, and walked away from his studies at the gymnasium, he is considered to be smart-- although terrible with money, as he seemed to have never learned the value of money. Money never became an issue for him since his universal adoration caused others to provide for him. He despised vulgarity and was a huge proponent of chastity. Even his own father had a soft spot for him. An interaction between Aloyosha and his father was revealed, one which highlighted both Aloyosha's patience and the father's buffoonery.

Aloysha left his studies suddenly to seek out his beloved mother's grave. The image of his beloved mother wailing at an icon in an apse with "the oblique rays of the setting sun" was a prominent motif in the introduction, and it appeared to be part of the motivation for his deep religious conviction. This deep devotion is the subject of a particularly poignant quote regarding the human condition and the need for meaning.

> Oh, he understood all too well that for the humble soul of the common Russian peasant, exhausted by the toil and woe, and even more by the perpetual injustice and perpetual sin, both its own and that of the world, there was no more powerful need or consolation than to find a holy object or person and to fall down before it and worship it. (pg 45)

Lastly, Aloysha is described as a realist, which is something that Dostoyevsky claims as wholly compatible with being a man of faith.

> It will, perhaps, be said that Alyosha was dull-minded, undeveloped, had not completed his course, and the like. That he had not completed his course is true; but to say that he was dull-minded or stupid would be to do him a great injustice. I shall merely reiterate what I have already said above: he had entered upon this road simply because at that time it alone had made a strong impression on him and presented itself to him at once as an ideal of deliverance for his soul which was straining out of the murk unto the light. (pg 39).

Dostoyevsky claims that Aleksey's faith was a product of his realist attitude because his realism caused him to face a need for purpose and fulfillment. Faith was the first path to purpose and fulfillment to present itself. He threw himself into it wholeheartedly; following the lifestyle of his faith while not thinking too deeply its more esoteric aspects. This reflects Dostoevsky's personal beliefs as well. According to the "Religious beliefs" section of his Wikipedia entry, Dostoevsky was a devout Christian, and his works were particularly influenced by Heinrich Zschokke's *Die Stunden der Andacht*, a work which "preached a sentimental verison of Christianity entirely free from dogmatic content and with a strong emphasis on giving Christian love and social application."

### The Elder

The last person to be introduced in the story is the Elder Zosima. The elders in the Russian Orthodox church apparently had totalitarian control over their paritioners, something that Dostoevsky implies had been abused in the past. Thankfully for us, Zosima is an upright and loving person, although in his advanced age his health is beginning to fail. Zosima and the way that he operates his monastery appears to represent Dostoyevsky's ideal political form. This is reflected in Aloysha's thoughts when considering that the Elder was an isolated instance, suggesting that his teachings and lifestyle is an exception and not representative of the rule of the universe.

> 'It makes no difference, he is holy, in his heart there is the secret of renewal for all, the power that will at last establish truth and justice upon earth, when all men shall be holy and love one another, and there shall be neither rich nor poor, neither self-exalters nor humiliated, but all shall be as the children of God and the true reign of Christ shall begin.' Such were the dreams of Alyosha's heart. (pg 46)

Dostoyevsky supported the belief that the universal adoption of a form of Christianity focused on the teaching of Christ would cause human governments to be nearly obsolete. In such a society, Dostoyevsky believed that every person loving their neighbor as themselves would cause most modern day problems to wash away. In these introductory chapters he likens socialism to the atheist form of Christianity. Rather than bringing earth to heaven, as the religious desire, the socialists strove to bring heaven to earth. Styles of belief like this are generally lumped under the umbrella of Christian Socialism, which tends to differ from straight-up theocracy by emphasizing the practical works of Christ and the Apostles while decreasing the importance of liturgical and esoteric theological doctrine.

### The Beginning

And so the beginning scene is set. Mitya and his father are disputing over money. Ivan is mediating between them but was brought to town by his brother for some unknown, and likely conspiratorial purpose. The idea of seeking counsel from Elder Zosima was brought up half out of jest, and a meeting is set to take place in the Elder's cell; much to the trepidation of Aloysha, who feared that his family would only be there to ridicule a man whom he held in such high regard. To top it all off, Miusov, Mitya's erstwhile guardian and "Parisian 'forties and 'fifties liberal" had decided to join the proceedings out of curiousity.

### Fyodor Dodging Child Support

It becomes evident very quickly that Dostoevsky provides comic relief through the words and actions of Fyodor Pavlovich. I will do my best to include my favorite highlights throughout this series of posts.

> But the old lady's principal inheritor turned out to be an honest man, the marshal of nobility in that province. Having exchanged letters with Fyodor Pavlovich and having instantly divined that nothing would be forthcoming from him to support the upbringing of his own children (though Fyodor Pavlovich never openly refused, but merely employed delaying tactics as he always did in such cases, sometimes with a positive outpouring of sentimentalities)... (pg. 25)

{% wikipedia "Marshal of Nobility (Russia)" %}
