---
title: "The Brothers Karamazov - Book II"
date:  2026-05-18
categories: [literature]
tags: [Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Borthers Karamazov]
---

# The Brothers Karamazov

Penguin Classics, 2024

This write up relies on you having read the entry for Book I.

## Book II - An Inappropriate Gathering

After a short introduction to the family, Dostoyevsky wastes no time in jumping into some pretty heavy discussions. After such a varied and contentious group of individuals gathered before a man of great wisdom, the narrative took off running. In this book, we see images of both faith and unbelief, as well as dicussions exploring the nature of love, charity, lies, and the meaning of life itself.

## The Old Buffoon

Miusov, Fyodor, Aloysha, Ivan, and two high ranking monks are assembled before the Elder Zosima. Mitya has been late, partly because of a last minute invitation and partly out of his own neglect. Everyone assembled, even the militant-secular Miusov, expresses the utmost respect for the Elder. All except for Foyodor who, ever the entertainer, immediately begins spewing copious amounts of nonsense, much to the horror of the others--especially Miusov.

### Fyodor's Tone

Fyodor has an extremely glib personality. His dialogue reads very well in the tone of the archetypical sarcastic and mischevious animal character in a classic Disney film. This exchange is a great example.

> 'Bong on time!' Fyodor Pavlovich exclaimed. 'But my son Dmitry Fyodorovich still isn't here yet. Please accept my apologies for him. Sacred Elder! (Alyosh fairly shuddered in all his being at the 'Sacred Elder'.) Personally I always try to be punctual, to the very minute, as I know that punctuality is the courtesy of kings'<br><br>
'Except that you, at any rate, are not a king,' Miusov muttered instantly unable to hold himself in check. <br><br>
'No, I'm not, I'm not a king. And just fancy, Pyotr Aleksandrovich, why I even knew that myself, I swear to God I did! And there I go putting my foot in it as usual!' (pg. 58)

Another important note is how many rumors Fyodor refers to within these short exchanges.

> 'I wonder if there was any of this here in the days of the previous Elder, Varsonofy? They say that he didn't take kindly to refinement, used to come rushing out and beat even the feamle sex with his stick,' Fyodor Pavlovich observed as he climbed the steps of the porch.<br><br>
'The Elder Varsonofy did indeed on occasion to appear like a holy fool, as it were, but there are also many stupid talks about him. As for beating people with a stick, he ceratinly never did that,' the little monk replied. (pg 55)

He even refers to rumors he knew were not true. Before reading this passage, keep in mind that Dostoevsky explicitly describes Fyodor's mispronunciation of Diderot's name, an act that, given his position and the company he keeps, is perhaps intentional.

> 'He [the philosopher Diderot] went in and told him straight: "There is no God." Upon which the great hierarch raised his finger and replied: "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." Without further ado, Diderot fell down at his feet: "I believe," he cried, "and will accept baptism." And so he was baptized right then and there. Prince Dashkova was his godmother, and Potyomkin his godfather...<br><br>
'Fyodor Pavlovich, this is intolerable! I mean, you yourself know that you're talking nonsense and that this stupid anecdote is untrue, so why are you carrying on like this?' Miusov said in a trembling voice, by now completely unable to restrain himself.'<br><br>
'All my life I've had a suspicion it wasn't true!' Fyodor Pavlovich exclaimed with animation. (pg 60)

To make matters worse, Fyodor quickly reveals that his true intent in bringing up this rumor and drawing a rise out of Miusov was to embarrass him in front of the Elder. As he turned to dig into him, Fyodor blames Miusov for his loss of faith, an act that almost drives the accused to flee the room.

### The Elder's Response

Miusov's attempt to flee the room causes the Elder to intervene. The Elder reaffirms Miusov and guides him back to his seat, bidding him comfort. After baiting a response out of hist target, Fyodor immediately directs his levity at the Elder.

> What a good person I should be then! Master! he said, suddenly falling to his knees. 'What shall I do to inherit eternal life?' Even now it was hard to know whether he was joking or whether he really was in a state of such pious emotion. The Elder raised his eyes to him and with a smile pronounced: 'You yourself have long known what you must do, you have enough intelligence: renounce drunkenness and intemperance of the tongue, renounce volupuousness, and in particular the worship of money, and close your drinking houses, if not all, then at least two or three of them. And principally, above everything else: stop telling lies. (pg 62)"

Fyodor irreverantly poses the Elder the same question the rich man posed Jesus, a story which ends with the famous phrase "Truly truly I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than it is for a rich man to enter the kingdom of Heaven.". The Elder gives details. Fyodor must renounce his entire farcical personality, and at least show some form of contrition and restraint regarding his business, which caused so much damage to Russian society at the time of the novel. But the bit about lying is most interesting.

> 'You mean the sort of things I was saying about Diderot?'<br><br>
'No, it has nothing to do with that. The main thing is that you stop telling lies to yourself. The one who lies to himself and believes his own lies comes to a point where he can distinguish no truth either within himself or around him, and thus enters into a state of disrespect towards himself and others. Respecting no one, he loves no one, and to amuse and divert himself in the absence of love he gives himself up to his passions and to vulgar delights and becomes a complete animal in his vices, and all of it from perpetual lying to other people and himself. (pg 63)

The rumors, as annoying as they were, are not the issue that the Elder is addressing here. Instead he is addressing the core of Fyodor's rotted personality. Fyodor lies so much to, and has created such a twisted image of, himself that he has entered into something resembling a state of psychosis. This bars his ability to feel and express love, a crucial action the importance of which will be discussed later in the book. In order to fill the void, he descended into hedonism, a state novels from this time period often present as "the ultimate evil".

The Elder continues to explain additional problems which arise from lies: including pride, the inability to take criticism or ridicule, quarrelsomeness, and above all fear and trepidation that one day the truths behing your lies may be uncovered. But at the end, the Elder sees these outbursts for what they are--false gestures.

### How do we Avoid Lying?

Lying about serious matters is obviously a problem, and it is extremely discouraged by pretty much every religious and legal system for very good reason. Trust is at the heart of most social and economic interations, and if no one can be trusted then society cannot function. Humans create massive infrastructure in order to foster environments of trustworthiness. Licensing bodies attempt to create trustworthy doctors. Fact checkers and massive repositories of knowledge, such as Wikipedia, attempt to combat misinformation. The entirety of social contract depends on trust.

However, lying has a continuum of severity. When someone in their late 30's asks a friend if their new glasses makes them look middle-aged, a lie is likely to be the best response, and is often expected by the questioner. The idle, and obviously untrue, rumors told by Fyodor are likely inconsequential to all but people's opinion of Fyodor. Other lies, such as lies about one's accomplishments or abilities, can be much more severe. They impart the fear of discovery, the avoidance of which can result in an elaborate scheme of coverups cascading damage onto oneself and others. Worst of all, these lies are not solely told to others. Sometimes these lies can be things we tell ourselves. One example is wearing a fake persona in order to "fit in". A classic no-no in children's media, this "fake" personality at best results in the faker becoming abrasive due to the strain of their lies against their "true" personality. At worst, it can result in the borederline psychosis displayed by Fyodor Pavlovich.

How do we stop the impact of lies? One approach is to create systems of verification and trust so that the effects of lying are mitigated, though this discussion is likely contextutal. The other would be to eliminate lying outright, which, as we well know, is a hopeless and sysiphean task. What should we do in the face of insurmountable tasks and hopeless conditions? Voltaire demands that we "water our own gardens". So the best way to eliminate lying is to start by not telling lies.

> I'm starting with the man in the mirror<br>
  I'm asking him to change his ways<br>
  And no message could have been any clearer<br>
  If you want to make the world a better place take a look at yourself and make that change<br>
  (Michael Jackson, Man in the Mirror)

So how do we avoid lying? And how do we be "true to ourselves", as the sagacious writes at Disney and Nickelodeon extoll us to be? This requires intense introspection, extreme perserverance, and the avoidance of contentedness. A couple of mantras can come to the rescue.

"Do unto others as you would have done to yourself." The famous Golden Rule applies to an enormous amount of situations, and some of the most egregious of lies can be averted by pausing and honestly considering this question. Would you want someone else to lie to you about whatever it is you are considering lying about? It does not get much more straightforward than that.

But not all lies are as straightforward as intentionally saying something that you know to be untrue. Misinformation can be considered lies and people with good intentions can spread misinformation simply by repeating something that they believe to be true. A great mantra to consider in such cases is, "What do I know and how do I know it?" This not only requires you to consider the truth of your statements but also the trustworthiness of your sources of information, and it encourages you to evaluate your sources often.

## Women of Faith

It is at this point important for us to understand what is and is not faith. Here Dostoyevsky gives us three examples of belief and one of unbelief. The unbeliever then confronts the Elder Zosima, and the ensuing conversation delves into the love, charity, happiness, and the salvation of the soul.
