---
title: "The Brothers Karamazov - Book 1"
date:  2026-05-18
categories: [literature]
tags: [Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Borthers Karamazov]
---

# The Brothers Karamazov

Penguin Classics, 2024

## Series Introduction

The Brothers Karamazov has always been a book that I knew I needed to read but never got around to. I ended up starting it in college, but put it down due to a busy schedule. Now, realizing an interest in profound novels, I have decided to return to it. This series of posts will cover my reactions and thoughts about the novel.

## Book 1 - The Story of a Certain Little Family

As the title implies, the first book is about introducing the family and setting the stage of the story. The narrator for the story appears to be Fyodor Dostoyevsky himself relaying curious events about something that transpired in his local town. The narrator suggests that the story is set in a smaller, but not quite backwater, town in Russia. Based on what we can glean from the first book, the town has several large manors nearby, is in a region of Russia with many aristocratic estates, has a large and beautifully crafted monastary outside of town, and has several drinking establishments. I think but cannot confirm that the town is set somewhere between Moscow and the Ukraine.

### The Family

Four men, a father and three sons, are the focus of this story. The book begins by introducing them from eldest to youngest.

The father, named Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov, is not a good person. He groomed an heiress, swindled his way into a small fortune, found some people--Jewish as it happens--to manage it for him, and then partied his life away. Along the way, he tortured his first wife until she fled into a life of poverty and early death, forgot that he had a son, swindled another young heiress, had two children with her, drove her to insanity and her early grave, and gleefully gave away all three sons in the process. After this his life seems to have concerned itself with partying and practicing the time honored trade of dodging child support payments. He is not a good person.

At the time of the story, the father is described as a corpulous man. We do see comments on how his character experienced incremental changes sometimes when one of his sons came back into his life, so the author is appearing to prepare us for some sort of character shift on the father's part.

Curious that the father shares the name of the author.

### The Eldest Son

The eldest son, Dmitry (Mitya) Fyodorovich, was famously forgotten by his dad. An "enlightened" landed elite from a local estate took an interest in the boy and took him in to raise him. However, the noble soon lost interest and the son was passed from family to family. Although his life had serious ups and downs, he appeared to be a somewhat successful military officer and ended up making, and spending, large amounts of money. He always knew that his father was wealthy with an estate, but he seriously overestimated the value, something that his father used to swindle him into debt.

Upon learning that his father had trapped him into debt,

> ... it turned out, to his very great bewilderment, ... that he had already received from Fyodor Pavlovich in cash the entire value of his property and might even owe him money... The young man was horror-struck, suspected lying and deceit, became nearly beside himself and almost lost his reason. This was the event that led to the catastrophe, the description of which constitues the subject of my first, introductory novel or rather its outer aspect. (pg. 22)

First of all, I would like to take this time to comment on how cool Dostoyevskys narration is. He is literally telling the story to us, making it clear that these are his words. They also make the account feel much more realistic. We are also quickly placed at the scene of the opening of the novel, only to be thrown on another introductory tangent. This pattern of proceeding from the origin of one character to the beginning of the novel, only be to brought back to the origin of another character, is repeated through all of the sons. It is a very neat, and commonly used, plotline in many books and TV shows.

Character-wise, Mitya appears to be somewhat entitled, free-willed, and emotional.

### The Middle Son

Ivan showed academic promise from a young age. He was sent to be raised by a "tutor of geniuses" and then pursued a degree in the natural sciences. He was aware of the poor character of his father, and Ivan understood that he would likely never pry any of his share of the wealth from his father. Showing promise as a news reporter, he grinded his way through university and ended up being a literay critic of some renown.

As an aside, in the introduction, Dostoyevksy implies that he is not the biggest of fans of Russian critics. He implies that they are not the biggest fan of him either.

Oddly enough, he appeared to get along quite well with his father when he one day appeared in the village. He even went as far as to move in with his father, a curious move for someone who appears to be so polar opposite to their parent. It is then revealed that this may hint at conspiracy, as Ivan later reveals that he arrived partly at the behest of the elder brother, for reasons in which we are kept in suspense. Ivan is also described as the mediator between the father and the eldest son, as legal action has begun to take place.

And so another character is introduced, and another facet of the beginning of the novel is revealed.

### The Youngest Son

It is immediately apparent that Aleksey (Aloysha) is considered the hero of the story. In the author's note preceding the novel, Dostoyevsky even describes him as "...my hero, I am nevertheless aware that he is in no way a man of greatness, ..." 

Aleksey is described as a beloved saint. A lover of all and beloved by all, 

### Fyodor Dodging Child Support

> But the old lady's principal inheritor turned out to be an honest man, the marshal of nobility in that province. Having exchanged letters with Fyodor Pavlovich and having instantly divined that nothing would be forthcoming from him to support the upbringing of his own children (though Fyodor Pavlovich never openly refused, but merely employed delaying tactics as he always did in such cases, sometimes with a positive outpouring of sntimentalities)... (pg. 25)


{% wikipedia "Marshal of Nobility (Russia)" %}
